Angle_Rigidity_and_Its_Usage_to_Stabilize_Multiagent_Formations_in_2-D.pdf

--- PAGE 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMA TIC CONTROL, VOL. 66, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3667
Angle Rigidity and Its Usage to Stabilize
Multiagent Formations in 2-D
Liangming Chen , Member, IEEE , Ming Cao , Senior Member, IEEE , and Chuanjiang Li
Abstract—Motivated by the challenging formation stabi-
lization problem for mobile robotic teams wherein no dis-
tance or relative position measurements are available but
each robot can only measure some of relative angles with
respect to its neighbors in its local coordinate frame, we
develop the notion of “angle rigidity” for a multipoint frame-
work, named “angularity”, consisting of a set of nodes em-
bedded in a Euclidean space, and a set of angle constraints
among them. Different from bearings or angles deﬁned
in a global frame, the angles we use do not rely on the
knowledge of a global frame, and are signed according to
the counter-clockwise direction. Here, angle rigidity refers
to the property specifying that under proper angle con-
straints, the angularity can only translate, rotate, or scale
as a whole when one or more of its nodes are perturbed lo-
cally. We ﬁrst demonstrate that this angle rigidity property,
in sharp comparison to bearing rigidity or other reported
rigidity related to angles of frameworks in the literature, is
not a global property since an angle rigid angularity may
allow ﬂex ambiguity. We then construct necessary and suf-
ﬁcient conditions for inﬁnitesimal angle rigidity by check-
ing the rank of an angularity’s rigidity matrix. We develop a
combinatorial necessary condition for inﬁnitesimal minimal
angle rigidity. Using the developed theories, a formation
stabilization algorithm is designed for a robotic team to
achieve an angle rigid formation, in which only angle mea-
surements are needed. Simulation examples demonstrate
the advantages of the proposed angle-only formation con-
trol approach.
Index Terms—Angle/bearing measurements, angle rigid-
ity, formation control, angularity, multiagent systems.
I. I NTRODUCTION
O
VER the past decades, distance rigidity has been inten-
sively investigated both as a mathematical topic in graph
Manuscript received December 17, 2019; revised July 24, 2020; ac-
cepted September 5, 2020. Date of publication September 22, 2020;
date of current version July 28, 2021. The work of Ming Cao was
supported in part by the European Research Council under Grant ERC-
CoG-771687 and in part by The Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc
Research under Grant NWO-vidi-14134. The work of Chuanjiang Li was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 61876050. Recommended by Associate Editor K. Cai. (Corre-
sponding author: Liangming Chen.)
Liangming Chen and Ming Cao are with the Faculty of Science and
Engineering, University of Groningen, Groningen, 9747 AG, The Nether-
lands (e-mail: liangmingchen2018@gmail.com; ming.cao@ieee.org).
Chuanjiang Li is with the Department of Control Science and Engi-
neering, Harbin Institute of T echnology , Harbin 150001, China (e-mail:
lichuan@hit.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this article are available
online at https://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/T AC.2020.3025539
theory [1], [2] and an engineering problem in applications in-
cluding formations of multiagent systems [3], mechanical struc-
tures [4], and biological materials [5]. Distance rigidity [6] is de-
ﬁned using the property of distance preservation of translational
and rotational motions of a multipoint framework. To determine
whether a given framework is distance rigid, two methods have
been reported. The ﬁrst is to test the rank of the distance rigidity
matrix which is derived from the inﬁnitesimally distance rigid
motions [7]. The second is enabled by Laman’s theorem, which
is a combinatorial test and works only for generic frameworks.
More recently, bearing rigidity has been investigated, in which
the shape of a framework is prescribed by the interpoint bearings
or directions [8], [9]. By deﬁning the bearing as a unit vector in
a given global coordinate frame, bearing rigidity can be deﬁned
accordingly [9], [10]. To check whether a framework is bearing
rigid, conditions similar to those for distance rigidity have been
discussed [9]–[12].
Distance constraints in determining distance rigidity are in
general quadratic in the associated end points’ positions. While
a bearing constraint is always linear in the associated end point’s
position, the description of bearings directly depends on the
necessity of a global coordinate frame or a coordinate frame in
SE(2) or SE(3) [13], [14]. Different from distance and bearing
rigidity,1 in this study, we aim at presentingangle rigidity theory
for multipoint frameworks accommodating angle constraints as
either linear or quadratic constraints on the end points’ positions
without relying on a global coordinate frame. Different from the
usual deﬁnition for a scalar angle [15], [16], the angle deﬁned
in this article is signed. By deﬁning the counter-clockwise
direction to be each angle’s positive direction, angle rigidity
is deﬁned for an angularity which consists of vertices and angle
constraints among them. We show that the planar angle rigidity
is a local property because of the existence of ﬂex ambiguity. To
check whether an angularity is angle rigid, angle rigidity matrix
is derived based on the inﬁnitesimally angle rigid motions.
Then, the angle rigidity of an angularity can be determined by
testing the rank of its angle rigidity matrix. Also, we develop
a combinatorial necessary condition to test the angle rigidity
of an angularity. We underline that the Laman’s theorem and
Henneberg’s construction method do not apply directly to angle
rigidity, which makes our results crucial. Using the deﬁned
signed angles, we further propose the construction methods for
angle rigid and globally angle rigid angularities.
1Only refer to bearing rigidity in IR2 in the following.
0018-9286 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: HANGZHOU DIANZI UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 06:20:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---
3668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMA TIC CONTROL, VOL. 66, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
Besides its mathematical importance, angle rigidity is closely
related to the application in multiagent formation control for
robotic transportation [17], search and rescue of drones [18],
and satellite formation ﬂying [19]. Sensors used in formation
stabilization mainly include GPS receivers, radars, and cam-
eras, which can acquire absolute positions, interagent relative
positions, or angles/bearings [3], [20]. In particular, angle mea-
surements are becoming cheaper, more reliable, and accessible
than absolute or relative position measurements [12], [20]. Angle
information can be easily obtained by a passive sonar, camera,
or sensor array in its local coordinate frame [17]. Using angle
rigidity developed in this article, we show how to stabilize a pla-
nar formation by using only local angle measurements. Different
from the designed bearing-based formation control algorithms
in [9], [21] where all agents’ local coordinate frames are re-
quired to be aligned, the proposed angle-only formation control
algorithm does not require the alignment of agents’ coordinate
frames since the angle described in different planar coordinate
frames remains the same. We acknowledge that in [15], planar
angle rigidity is established by employing the cosine of an
angle formed by two joint edges as the angle constraint. The
formation stabilization algorithm constructed in [15] requires
that each agent can sense the relative positions with respect to
its neighbors. Different from [15], in this article, the desired
formation shape is realized using only angle measurements. In
addition, weak rigidity with mixed distance and angle constraints
has been investigated in [22]–[24], under which the formation
control algorithms are also designed for agents by using the
measurements of relative position.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
gives the deﬁnition of an angularity and its rigidity. Section III
introduces inﬁnitesimal angle rigidity. In Section IV, the applica-
tion in multiagent planar formations is investigated. Simulation
examples are provided in Section V.
II. A NGULARITY AND ITS ANGLE RIGIDITY
Graphs have been used dominantly in rigidity theory for
multipoint frameworks under distance constraints since an edge
of a graph can be naturally used to denote the existence of a
distance constraint between the two points corresponding to
the vertices adjacent to this edge. However, when describing
angles formed by rays connecting points, to use edges of a
graph becomes inappropriate because an angle constraint always
involves three points. For this reason, instead of using graphs
that relate pairs of vertices as the main tool to deﬁne rigidity, we
deﬁne a new combinatorial structure “angularity” that relates
triples of vertices to develop the theory of angle rigidity. In all
the following discussions, we conﬁne ourselves to the plane.
A. Angularity
We use the vertex set V = {1, 2,...,N } to denote the set of
indices of the N ≥3 points of a framework in the plane. As
shown in Fig. 1, to describe the signed angle from the ray j −i
to ray j −k, one needs to use the ordered triplet (i,j,k ), and,
obviously, the two angles corresponding to (i,j,k ) and (k,j,i )
Fig. 1. Signed angle used in deﬁning angle rigidity .
are different, and in fact are called explementary or conjugate an-
gles. Here, following convention, the angle ∡ijk for each triplet
(i,j,k ) is measured counter-clockwise in the range [0, 2π).
We useA⊂V×V×V = {(i,j,k ),i,j,k ∈V,i ̸= j ̸= k} to
denote the angle set, each element of which is an ordered triplet.
We denote the number of elements |A| of the angle set A by
M . Throughout this article, we assume that no pair of triplets
in A are explementary to each other. Now consider the embed-
ding of the vertex set V in the plane IR2 through which each
vertex i is associated with a distinct position pi ∈IR2 and let
p =[ pT
1,...,p T
N ]T ∈IR2N . We assume there is no overlapping
points inp, i.e.,pi ̸= pj fori ̸= j andi,j ∈{1, 2,...,N }. Then,
the combination of the vertex set V, the angle set A, and the
position vector p is called an angularity, which we denote by
A(V,A,p ). Actually, given nonoverlapping positionspi,pj , and
pk, the angle ∡ijk ∈[0, 2π) can be uniquely calculated from
∡ijk =
{
arccos(zT
jizjk ) ifz⊥
ji ·zjk ≥0
2π−arccos(zT
jizjk ) otherwise (1)
where zji = pi−pj
∥pi−pj∥ , zjk = pk−pj
∥pk−pj∥ , z⊥
ji = Q0zji =[
0 −1
10
]
zji is the vector obtained by rotating zji counter-
clockwise by π
2 , and · denotes the dot product.
B. Angle Rigidity
We ﬁrst deﬁne what we mean by two equivalent or congruent
angularities.
Deﬁnition 1 (Equivalency and congruency): We say two an-
gularities A(V,A,p ) and A′(V,A,p′) with the same V and A
are equivalent if
∡ijk(pi,pj,pk)= ∡ijk(p′
i,p′
j,p′
k) for all (i,j,k ) ∈A. (2)
W es a yt h e ya r econgruent if
∡ijk(pi,pj,pk)= ∡ijk(p′
i,p′
j,p′
k) for all i,j,k ∈V. (3)
From the equivalent and congruent relationships, it is easy to
deﬁne global angle rigidity.
Deﬁnition 2 (Global angle rigidity): An angularity
A(V,A,p ) is globally angle rigid if every angularity that
is equivalent to it is also congruent to it.
When such a rigidity property holds only locally, one has
angle rigidity.
Deﬁnition 3 (Angle rigidity): An angularity A(V,A,p ) is
angle rigid if there exists an ϵ> 0 such that every angularity
A′(V,A,p′) that is equivalent to it and satisﬁes ∥p′ −p∥ <ϵ is
congruent to it.
Deﬁnition 3 implies that every conﬁguration which is sufﬁ-
ciently close to p and satisﬁes all the angle constraints formed
Authorized licensed use limited to: HANGZHOU DIANZI UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 06:20:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
CHEN et al.: ANGLE RIGIDITY AND ITS USAGE TO ST ABILIZE MUL TIAGENT FORMA TIONS IN 2-D 3669
Fig. 2. Flex ambiguity in angle rigid angularity .
byA has the same magnitudes of the angles formed by any three
vertices in V as the original conﬁguration at p.
As is clear from Deﬁnitions 2 and 3, global angle rigidity
always implies angle rigidity. A natural question to ask is
whether angle rigidity also implies global angle rigidity. In fact,
for bearing rigidity, it has been shown that indeed global bearing
rigidity and bearing rigidity are equivalent [9], [10]. However,
this is not the case for angle rigidity.
Theorem 1 (Nonequivalence between angle rigidity and
global angle rigidity): An angle rigid angularity A(V,A,p ) is
not necessarily globally angle rigid.
We prove this theorem by providing the following example.
Fig. 2shows an angularity withV = {1, 2, 3, 4}, and its elements
in the set A = {(3, 2, 1), (1, 3, 2), (2, 3, 4), (1, 4, 2)} take the
values
∡321 = arccos
(
4
√
3−2
2
√
17−4
√
3
)
≈39.07◦ (4)
∡132 = arccos
(
19−8
√
3√
25−12
√
3
√
17−4
√
3
)
≈37.88◦ (5)
∡234 = 30◦ (6)
∡142 = 45◦ (7)
and its p is shown as in the coordinates of the vertices. We ﬁrst
show A(V,A,p ) is angle rigid, and then show A(V,A,p ) is not
globally angle rigid.
Now ﬁrst look at the triangle formed by 1, 2, and 3. Since
two of its angles ∡321 and ∡132 have been constrained, the re-
maining ∡213 is uniquely determined to be π−∡321−∡132,
no matter how p is locally perturbed. The constraint on ∡234
requires 4 must lie in the ray starting from 3 and rotating from
ray 32 counter-clockwise by30◦; at the same time, the constraint
on ∡142 requires 4 must lie on the arc passing through 1 and
2 such that the inscribed angle ∡142 is 45◦. No matter how
p is locally perturbed, there is only one unique position for
4 in the neighborhood of its current given coordinates because
the two intersection points between the ray and the arc are not
in the same local neighborhood. This local uniqueness implies
that this four-vertex angularity is angle rigid (when 4’s position
Fig. 3. Nongeneric p changes rigidity . (a) Not rigid when ∠213 = π
3 .
(b) Angle rigid when ∠213 = 0 . (c) Globally angle rigid when ∠213 = π.
is uniquely determined, any angle associated with it is also
uniquely determined).
Now we show A(V,A,p ) is not globally angle rigid. Note
that there is the other intersection point 4′ as shown in Fig. 2
satisfying the angle constraints given in A, which implies that
this angularity is not globally angle rigid because A(V,A,p′) is
equivalent to A(V,A,p ), but they are not congruent.
We provide the following further insight to explain this sharp
difference between the angle rigidity that we have deﬁned and
the bearing rigidity that has been reported in the literature. Bear-
ing rigidity as deﬁned in [9], [10] is a global property because
the bearing constraints always represent linear constraints in the
end point’s position (similar to the angle constraint ∡234 = 30◦
in the form of the ray from 3 to 4 in the above example) and
two noncollinear rays have at most one intersection. In contrast,
our angle constraint can be either linear constraint in p when
it requires the corresponding vertex to be on a ray or quadratic
in p when it restricts the corresponding vertex to be on an arc
passing through other vertices. The possible nonlinearity in the
angle constraints gives rise to potential ambiguity of the vertices’
positions under the given angle constraints.
Note that the embedding of p in the plane may affect the
rigidity of A. Consider the 3-vertex angularity as embedded in
three different situations in Fig. 3 when its angle set A contains
only one element (2,1,3). Fig. 3(a) shows that 1, 2, and 3 are
not collinear, and then this angularity is in general not rigid
since if we perturb point 1 in an arc with 2 and 3 as the arc’s
ending points, ∡213 can be the same while angles ∡123 and
∡132 change. In Fig. 3(b) , 1, 2, and 3 are collinear and 1 is
on one side; in this case, if the angle constraint happens to be
∡213 = 0 , then one can check the angularity becomes angle
rigid, although it is not globally rigid since the angle of ∡132
changes by 180 degree if we swap 2 and 3. InFig. 3(c),1 ,2 ,a n d3
are collinear and 1 is in the middle; when the constraint becomes
∡213 = π, one can check that the angularity is not only rigid,
but also globally rigid (swapping of 2 and 3 in this case does
not change the resulting angles ∡132, ∡123 being zero). So the
angularity A({1, 2, 3},{(2, 1, 3)},p ) is generically not rigid, but
rarely rigid depending onp. To clearly describe this relationship
between angle rigidity andp, like in standard rigidity theory, we
deﬁne what we mean by generic positions.
Deﬁnition 4 (Generic position): The position vector p is
said to be generic if its components are algebraically indepen-
dent [25]. Then, we say an angularity isgenerically (respectively
globally) angle rigid if its p is generic and it is (respectively
globally) angle rigid.
An example for nongeneric positions is the case when three
points are collinearly positioned. Note that angle rigidity for
Authorized licensed use limited to: HANGZHOU DIANZI UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 05,2026 at 06:20:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 