s11431-024-2896-5.pdf

--- PAGE 1 ---
SCIENCE CHINA
T echnological Sciences
 Print-CrossMark
July
2025, V ol. 68, Iss. 7, 1720402:1–1720402: 15
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11431-024-2896-5
c⃝ Science China Press 2025 tech.scichina.com link.springer.com
. RESEARCH PAPER .
Multi-agent distributed formation control using local information
measurements
Jianqing LI1, Liaofei CHEN 2* & Chaoyong LI 3
1Space Information Research Institute and Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Space Information Sensing and Transmission, Hangzhou Dianzi University,
Hangzhou 310018, China
2College of Communication Engineering, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China
3College of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
Received November 18, 2024; accepted February 8, 2025; published online May 28, 2025
Abstract This
paper investigates formation control in multi-agent systems to adjust deformation and scaling for obstacle avoid-
ance using local information. A well-known issue with angle-based formation control is the existence of size ambiguity. In-
troducing additional controlled variables can potentially mitigate this problem. Therefore, unlike purely angle-based formation
control methods that can only adjust deformation, our approach can also control scaling by introducing distance measurements.
Speciﬁcally, all agents use their local coordinate systems and sense neighboring agents to obtain angle measurements, with only
one agent measuring the distance to its neighbor. In the proposed formation control scheme, angle measurements are used to
control the desired shape, while distance measurements regulate the formation scaling. Di ﬀerent formation control strategies for
triangular and polygonal conﬁgurations are discussed, utilizing angle rigidity to ensure the stability of the ﬁnal shape in polygonal
conﬁgurations with only one distance measurement used for formation scaling. Additionally, by relaxing the condition of angular
rigidity and utilizing the concept of formation rigidity, we propose a formation determination method to construct a rigid square
conﬁguration, in which a pair of distances measured by one agent are used to control the formation’s scaling. Finally, using a
simpliﬁed model of a quadrotor unmanned aerial vehicle (QUA V), simulation results validate the e ﬀectiveness of the proposed
formation control scheme through several examples.
Keywords angle measurements, distance measurements, formation control, rigid formation, multi-agent systems
Citation: Li
J Q, Chen L F, Li C Y . Multi-agent distributed formation control using local information measurements. Sci China Tech Sci, 2025, 68(7): 1720402,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11431-024-2896-5
1
Introduction
In recent years, collaborative control of multi-agent systems
has attracted widespread attention, with formation control is-
sues receiving extensive research due to their signiﬁcance
across multiple application domains [1,2]. Examples include
unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V) search and rescue[3], collab-
orative transport of ground robots [4], and satellite formation
ﬂying [5].
A key focus is addressing which variables need to be
sensed and actively controlled to achieve desired formations
*
Corresponding author (email: liaofei@hdu.edu.cn)
in multi-agent systems, as mentioned in ref. [6]. Sensors
used for formation control typically include the global posi-
tioning system (GPS), radar, and cameras, which can mea-
sure positions, inter-agent distances, and bearings, respec-
tively. The existing formation control methods are catego-
rized based on the sensors and control variables used, includ-
ing position-based, displacement-based (consensus-based)
[7, 8], direction-based, distance-based, and angle-based ap-
proaches. However, a disadvantage of position-based forma-
tion control is that it typically requires a global coordinate
system shared among the agents [9]. In displacement-based
methods, agents measure the relative positions of their neigh-
bors in a common reference coordinate system, necessitating
--- PAGE 2 ---
Li
J Q, et al. Sci China Tech Sci July 2025, V ol. 68, Iss. 7, 1720402:2
that all agents have a shared sense of direction [10, 11]. This
implies that the local coordinate frames of all agents need to
be aligned [12]. Achieving perfect alignment of all agents’
coordinate systems is challenging due to the presence of sen-
sor measurement noise and interference. When there is a
misalignment in the agents’ coordinate frames, the forma-
tion shape speciﬁed by relative positions may be distorted
and exhibit non-zero translational velocity [13, 14]. In ref.
[15], the theory of bearing rigidity was established, but it
still requires agents to know a global reference frame. In con-
trast, distance/angle-based formation methods that rely solely
on local information from multi-agent systems have become
popular, even though they increase the complexity of their
design and analysis.
Over the past few decades, distance rigidity has been ex-
tensively studied both as a mathematical topic in graph the-
ory [16] and as an engineering problem in the application
of multi-agent system formations. Distance rigidity [17] is
deﬁned based on the property that distances within a multi-
point framework remain invariant under translational and ro-
tational motions. Without requiring coordinate frame align-
ment, the desired formation shape described by distances was
achieved using local relative position measurements in ref.
[18] by employing distance rigidity theory. Moreover, a the-
ory based on bearing rigidity was proposed [15, 19]. Agents
maintain their relative orientation with respect to their neigh-
bors to ensure the stability of the formation. However, meth-
ods solely based on bearings become ambiguous due to the
lack of measurement for formation size. To address this,
a bearing-based approach within the leader-follower frame-
work was introduced [20, 21], but it requires that the ma-
neuvering strategies of two leaders be pre-planned. With the
advancement of sensor technology, angle measurements can
be easily obtained through omnidirectional radar or vision-
based cameras, which are cheaper, more reliable, and more
accessible than distance measurements [22, 23]. Since angle
measurements are scalars and do not change with motion, in-
cluding translation, rotation, and scaling [24, 25], the theory
of angle rigidity was established in ref. [26]. By assigning
appropriate angle constraints to the agents, the desired for-
mation shape can be achieved. However, a resulting issue
is that the angles do not change with the scaling of the for-
mation. When relying solely on angle information for con-
trol, the size of the formation becomes ambiguous when the
multi-agent system stabilizes. To address this issue, a con-
trol algorithm for multi-agent systems was designed in ref.
[27], which determines the formation shape through angle
constraints while still using relative position measurements
in the global coordinate system to scale the formation. Re-
cently, the formation control method combining angle and
distance has been studied in refs. [28, 29], and a formation
control scheme with directed graph distance measurements
and angle constraints has been proposed. However, these
methods impose complex directed graph distance constraints
and angle measurements, increasing the di ﬃculty of forma-
tion rigidity design. In many cases, it is necessary to ma-
nipulate the formation scale, such as to avoid obstacles [30],
and the variation in pairwise distances between agents during
scaling complicates the control algorithm.
Motivated by the work above, we propose a formation
scaling control law based on angle and distance to address
formation maintenance during obstacle avoidance. This ap-
proach requires each agent to measure only the angle infor-
mation of its neighbors, with only one agent responsible for
measuring distance information. Angle rigidity ensures the
stability of the ﬁnal formation shape, while distance control
manages the scaling of the formation. The contributions of
this paper are summarized as follows.
(1) Compared with ref. [26], this addresses the issue of
ambiguity in controlling the formation size using only an-
gle information. In ref. [26], when the formation system is
stable, all angle constraints are satisﬁed. However, because
angles do not change with scaling motions, the overall size
of the formation is ambiguous and cannot be controlled arbi-
trarily. Additionally, to relax an angular rigidity constraint in
ref. [26], we discuss a method using a square formation case
to control the scaling by weighting a pair of distances in two
diﬀerent directions.
(2) Diﬀ erent from the rigidity formation methods that
combine angle and distance-directed graph in refs. [28, 29],
the scaling transformation of the formation in this paper is
controlled by a single agent, eliminating the need to change
a large number of desired distances between di ﬀerent agents
and thereby simplifying the complexity of the control algo-
rithm during the process of expansion and contraction mo-
tion.
(3) This work represents a preliminary step in address-
ing the problem of formation maintenance, deformation, and
scaling control based on local information. Due to the di ﬃ-
culty in constructing a Lyapunov function, we have currently
proven the local convergence of the closed-loop nonlinear
formation under double integrator dynamics. In view of this,
we provide suﬃcient conditions to ensure the stability of the
double integrator formation, which o ﬀers valuable guidance
for future research.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 introduces the agent formation control problem. Sec-
tion 3 presents the main results with diﬀ erent conﬁgurations.
Section 4 shows the simulation results examining the perfor-
mance of the proposed formation control law.
Notations: An undirected graph, denoted as G = (V, E),
consists of a vertex set V = {1, 2, . . . ,n} and an edge set
E ⊆ V × V with m = |E|. The set of neighbors of vertex i
is denoted as Ni , { j ∈ V : ( i, j) ∈ E}. An orientation of
an undirected graph is the assignment of a direction to each
edge. An oriented graph is an undirected graph together with
--- PAGE 3 ---
Li J Q, et al. Sci China Tech Sci July 2025, V ol. 68, Iss. 7, 1720402:3
an orientation.
2 Problem formulation
For the n mobile agents moving in the plane, we deﬁne the
set of agent indexes as V = {1, 2, · · · , n}. The dynamics of
each agent i can be described as



˙pi = vi,
˙vi = ui,
∀i ∈ V, (1)
where pi ∈ R2 denotes the position of agent i in the ﬁxed
global coordinate system, vi ∈ R2 is the velocity and ui ∈ R2
is the control input.
The following assumptions are made for all agents to
achieve the desired formation conﬁguration.
Assumption 1 All agents are already on the same plane
when the formation needs to deform and scale.
Assumption 2 Each agent is equipped with a sensor to
measure LOS (Line of Sight).
Assumption 3 The initial positions of the agents are in-
dependent and non-collinear.
Assumption 1 ensures that the formation is in a two-
dimensional plane. Assumption 2 requires each agent to
measure the directional angle of its neighbor with respect to
its local coordinate system. Assumption 3 guarantees that the
angle bisector direction exists and is unique.
Under Assumptions 1 and 2, each agent i can measure the
angle θi j ∈ [0, 2) relative to j ∈ N i in its local coordinate
frame ∑
i, as shown in Figure 1. The local coordinate system
satisﬁes the right-hand frame. Then, the angle αi in the xi-yi
plane can be given by
αi = θi j − θik, (2)
where αi ∈ [0, 2) is the interior angle of the triangle formed
by j, i and k.
As shown in Figure 1, the agent i can measure the LOS
angle of its neighbors. Then, the interior angle αi can be cal-
culated by
cos αi = z⊤
i jzik, (3)
where zi j = pj− pi
∥ pj− pi∥ , which starts from i, points toward j.
Let α∗
i ∈ (0, ) be the desired steady-state angles of the
formation as shown in Figure 2(a). The angle-based forma-
tion problem becomes the realization of the desired angle
constraint:
lim
t→+∞
( αi(t) − α∗
i
) = 0. (4)
Deﬁnition 1 (Angle rigidity and global angle rigidity, ref.
[26, Deﬁnition 2, Deﬁnition 3] )
We give our description of the uniqueness of the frame-
work based on graph theory.
Deﬁnition 2 (Similarity and congruence) If two frame-
works G1 = (V1, E1, W1) and G2 = (V2, E2, W2) satisfy
the following conditions: (1) They have the same topological
structure (i.e., there exists a graph isomorphism f : V1 →
V2, such that for every edge ( i, j) ∈ E 1, there is an edge
( f (i), f ( j)) ∈ E 2). (2) For each pair of corresponding edges
e1i ∈ E 1 and e2i ∈ E 2, their weights satisfy w1i = k·w2i, where
k is a ﬁxed proportional constant; then it can be said that the
two frameworks are similar if k , 1, denoted as G1 ∼ G 2 and
we say that two frameworks are congruent if k = 1, that is,
G1 , G2.
However, a problem arises when relying solely on the con-
straints of eq. (4); it cannot e ﬀectively control the formation
scale. For instance, we observed that the angles used to con-
strain the conﬁguration in Figure 2(a) and (b) both satisfy
eq. (4), but they do not determine the distances between the
agents. When the system is stable, it satisﬁes the angular
rigidity as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 1, but the actual framework
G is not congruent with the desired framework G∗. In other
words, achieving the desired shape may result in the agents’
formation scale being either too large or too small, that is,
similarity as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.
A triangle can be uniquely determined given its three an-
gles and any one side. Therefore, for triangular forma-
tions, we can achieve the expansion and contraction of the
Figure 1 (Color online) The angle measurements.
Figure 2 Uncertainty in formation scale based solely on angle con-
trol.