Satellite_Formation_Flying_Control_by_Using_Only_Angle_Measurements.pdf

--- PAGE 1 ---
Satellite Formation Flying
Control by Using Only Angle
Measurements
JIANQING LI
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
LIANGMING CHEN
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
MING CAO , Fellow, IEEE
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
CHAOYONG LI , Member, IEEE
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
This article investigates a practical formation control problem
of multisatellite system, in which a group of small satellites are re-
quired to reach and maintain a desired geometric conﬁguration under
communication and measurement constraints. Toward this goal, we
consider each satellite uses its local coordinate system and senses
its neighboring satellites to obtain angle measurements. A formation
control scheme using only the angle measurements is proposed to form
the desired conﬁguration. Moreover, the triangular and polygonal
conﬁguration cases are considered, in which the sum of interior angles
of polygons being a constant is utilized to guarantee the stability
of the determined ﬁnal conﬁguration. In particular, motivated by
formation rigidity principles which mean that satellites’ formation
is seen as a multipoint framework that needs to be rigid to guarantee
the uniqueness of the shape, we propose a formation determination
Manuscript received 2 February 2022; revised 8 June 2022; accepted 16
August 2022. Date of publication 22 August 2022; date of current version
12 April 2023.
DOI. No. 10.1109/TAES.2022.3200345
Refereeing of this contribution was handled by S. Sukumar.
This work was supported in part by the NSFC 62088101 Autonomous
Intelligent Unmanned Systems and in part by the Zhejiang Provincial
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant L Y22A020007 and
Grant LR20F030003.
Authors‘ addresses: Jianqing Li is with the College of Communication
Engineering, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, 310018, China,
E-mail: (jianqing@hdu.edu.cn.). Liangming Chen is with School of Me-
chanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological Univer-
sity, Singapore, 639798 E-mail: (liangmingchen2018@gmail.com.). Ming
Cao is with Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Gronin-
gen, Groningen, 9747 AG, The Netherlands, E-mail: (m.cao@rug.nl.).
Chaoyong Li is with the College of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, 310027, China, E-mail: (chaoyong@zju.edu.cn.).
(Corresponding authors: Liangming Chen; Chaoyong Li.)
0018-9251 © 2022 IEEE
approach to construct a rigid square conﬁguration and prove that,
compared with existing schemes, the inter-satellite relative positions
and the knowledge of the communication topology are not needed for
the proposed formation control law. Moreover, since the angle mea-
surements are scalars and sensed with respect to the local coordinate
system, the proposed angle-based formation control law is more robust
against the misalignment on satelltes’ coordinate systems. Simulation
results are presented to illustrate the performance of the proposed
control laws.
I. INTRODUCTION
Satellite formation ﬂying has been of growing interest
to environmental measurement and Earth observation due
to its large geographic coverage and rich sensing func-
tionalities. In particular, the technological development of
small satellites enables satellite formations to excel in their
modularity, low cost, and distributed functionality [1]. In
order to take advantage of satellite formations to implement
space missions, several formation conﬁgurations have been
extensively studied for engineering applications, such as
a triangular formation for detecting gravitational waves [2]
and tracking of a missile launch [3], and a hexagonal regular
formation for building large antennas [4].
In satellite formation control, the position-based con-
trol approach is widely used to maintain the formation
conﬁgurations. Satellites measure their own positions and
velocities through the global positioning system or inertial
navigation system. The desired formation can be achieved
by the feedback control of the individual satellite’s absolute
position without communication between each other [5].
Under a properly designed communication topology and
sensing topology, the displacement-based formation con-
trol, which requires that satellites obtain relative positions
with respect to their neighbors, is applied to improve the
robustness of formation keeping. During the last decade,
the displacement-based formation control has been widely
applied to satellite formation control that can be either
centralized or decentralized [6], [7]. To achieve the desired
formation conﬁguration, the consensus theory is usually
taken to design the formation control law [8], [9], [10].
In recent years, the bearing-based formation control,
which determines the desired formation by sensing the rel-
ative bearings with respect to neighbors [11], [12], has been
extensively studied for multiagent systems. For satellite
formation control, the line of sight (LOS) vector acquired
by vision-based sensors and star trackers can be used as
the bearing measurements for control. Gurﬁl [13] studied
the cyclic pursuit formation problem where each satellite
tracks the LOS to a single neighboring satellite so as to
form a cyclic formation. Since each satellite only acquires
the information from one neighboring satellite in the cyclic
topology, the cyclic satellite formation needs the minimal
number of communication connections and measurements
in which the information interaction among the satellites is
effectively reduced.
However, the position-based, displacement-based, and
bearing-based formation control require the measurements
to be in a global coordinate frame or a common coordi-
nate frame shared by all the agents [14], which means the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 59, NO. 2 APRIL 2023 1439
Authorized licensed use limited to: HANGZHOU DIANZI UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 07:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---
orientations of the coordinate frames of all satellites need
to be aligned with each other. To relax this restriction, some
formation control schemes based on distance or angle mea-
surements are investigated [15], [16]. In the distance-based
formation control, the agents measure relative positions of
their neighbors with respect to their own local coordinate
systems. To ensure the uniqueness of the desired formation,
the distance rigidity, in which the constraints on those
desired distances are sufﬁcient for the maintenance of the
distances of any pair of agents, is used to describe the
desired conﬁguration [17]. In particular, the angle-based
formation control attracted much attention due to the fact
that the angle measurements are cheaper and more acces-
sible [14]. More importantly, angle measurements can be
taken from bearings deﬁned and measured in satellites’ local
coordinate systems without a common sense of orientation.
Basiri [18] ﬁrst presented the result on provably stable
angle-only formation control for a triangular formation
case. Further, Bishop [19] developed a distributed control
law for triangular formation control using a mixture of
distance and angle information. This mixture allows the
agents to have heterogeneous sensing capabilities. Since the
angle measurements are scalars and are invariant to motions
including formations’ translations, rotations, and scalings,
a new angle rigidity scheme was developed to solve the
formation control problem by using angle constraints [20].
Note that the existing angle-based control results have fo-
cused on the angle-based control for single-integrator agent
models. Thus, it is necessary to investigate more realistic
applications of angle-based formation control.
From the practical point of view, unique features of
the small satellite formation are threefold. First, less and
lower cost computational instruments are essential for the
satellite formation control because small satellites are con-
strained by size and power consumption. Second, the pre-
vious studies on formation control requires that satellites
sense measurements with respect to the global coordinate
frame or have the common orientations of local coordi-
nate frames. This demands for the precise attitude control
of all satellites. Third, there is no enough infrastructure
for all-to-all communication among small satellites. More-
over, technical challenges arise from communication delays
and topology switching. These arguments motivate us to
look for a cheaper and more reliable formation control
scheme.
In this article, we consider the circular satellite forma-
tion control problem, where only angle measurements are
available to each satellite. The angle measurements can be
obtained by star trackers or cameras [21], [22]. Moreover, a
satellite formation control scheme for the practical dynam-
ics is proposed, in which the knowledge of the positions
of neighboring satellites and communication topology are
unnecessary to construct the formation control law. In par-
ticular, the orientations of the local measurement coordinate
systems of all satellites are unnecessary to be aligned to each
other.
The contributions of this article are summarized as
follows. 1) In our proposed formation control scheme, only
Fig. 1. L VLH coordinate system.
the angle measurements are required to construct the control
law, which implies that an individual satellite does not need
to acquire its relative position information with respect to
other satellites. 2) Compared with the bearing-based forma-
tions where all satellites should have a common coordinate
frame or a preset coordinate frame, the proposed angle-
based formation control law is robust to the misalignment
in satellites’ measurement coordinate frames, in the sense
that each satellite is allowed to use different coordinate
frames to obtain the measurements. 3) For the angle-based
formation control, we provide a speciﬁc construction for
the square conﬁguration, in which the square formation
can be uniquely determined by only sensing one angle
measurement of neighbors.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II introduces the satellite formation control problem.
Section III presents the main results with different conﬁgu-
rations. Section IV shows the simulation results examining
the performance of the proposed formation control.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this article, we investigate the relative motion control
of a group of n satellites ﬂying on orbits relative to a circular
reference orbit such that a satellite formation is obtained
and maintained. The dynamic equations of relative motions
are expressed in the local vertical local horizontal (L VLH)
frame o-xyz [23], as shown in Fig. 1. The reference origin of
this coordinate system is set on the circular reference orbit.
Let In ∈ Rn×n, 0m×n ∈ Rm×n,a n d1n ∈ Rn×1 be the iden-
tity matrix, zero matrix, and column vector with all ones,
respectively. Let∥·∥ denote the Euclidean norm of a vector.
A. Circular Formation Control
For the n satellites in 3-D, let pi ∈ R3 and vi ∈ R3 be the
position and velocity of satellite i ∈{ 1, 2,... , n} expressed
in L VLH. As described in [23], the relative dynamics of the
1440 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 59, NO. 2 APRIL 2023
Authorized licensed use limited to: HANGZHOU DIANZI UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 07:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Fig. 2. LOS angle measurements.
ith satellite are described by
[
˙pi
˙vi
]
=
[
03 I3
/Omega11 /Omega12
][
pi
vi
]
+
[
03
I3
]
ui (1)
where
/Omega11 =
⎡
⎣
3ω2
r 00
00 0
00 −ω2
r
⎤
⎦ , /Omega12 =
⎡
⎣
02 ωr 0
− 2ωr 00
00 0
⎤
⎦
ωr ∈ R denotes the constant angular rate of the circular
reference orbit, and ui ∈ R3 denotes the control input.
Using the above relative motion model, we will show
that when the satellites’ initial conditions satisfy some tech-
nical relations, each satellite’s motion forms a stable relative
circular orbit with respect to the reference origin [23]. The
following assumptions are made for all satellites.
ASSUMPTION 1 All satellites are initially on their relative
circular ﬂying orbits with different radii and maintain the
same direction of angular momentum of relative orbits.
ASSUMPTION 2 The satellites do not communicate with
each other and are each equipped with a sensor that provides
relative LOS local bearing (or angle) measurements only.
ASSUMPTION 3 The initial satellite positions are separate
and noncollinear, i.e., cos⟨pij (0), pik (0)⟩ ̸= ±1, ∀i ̸= j ̸=
k, where pik = pk − pi,a n d <> denotes the subtended
angle formed by the corresponding two vectors.
Assumption 1 ensures that all satellites have the same
direction of motion (i.e., clockwise or counterclockwise)
and their relative orbits are coplanar. Assumption 2 im-
plies that there is no requirement on the communication
topology. For the local sensing, satellites sense the relative
LOS angles of their neighboring satellites with respect to
their local coordinate systems. The noncollinear condition
of Assumption 3 guarantees the formation will not become
collinear for a small t > 0, and the collision will not happen
for t > 0.
Under Assumptions 1–3, satellite i measures the LOS
angle θij ∈ [0, 2π) with respect to its neighboring satellite j
in its own coordinate frame as shown in Fig. 2. The origin of
the measurement coordinate system is assumed to be ﬁxed
at the center of mass of the satellite. The xsi , ysi ,a n dzsi axes
form a right-hand frame, where the zsi axis is parallel to the
angular momentum of the relative orbits. Then, the angleαi
in the xsi –ysi plane can be obtained as follows:
αi = θij − θik (2)
where θij and θik are measured counterclockwise from the
xsi -axis of the local coordinate frame.
In this work, we aim to achieve a desired geometric
conﬁguration in which all satellites operate around the
reference origin with the identical radius, maintain a con-
stant distance from each other, and thus form the circular
formation of satellites. The circular formation problem is
formally deﬁned as follows.
PROBLEM 1( A NGLE-BASED CIRCULAR FORMA TION
CONTROL) Consider a group of n ≥ 3 satellites with
relative dynamics deﬁned in (1) under Assumptions 1–3.
Find a formation control law for each satellite using only
relative LOS angle measurements such that the circular
formation is achieved.
It should be pointed out that circular formation has
been extensively studied in the open literature [24], [25];
however, what cultivated inProblem 1 lean towards solving
the underlying problem with the least communication and
measurement requirements, which still lacks rigorous de-
velopment and sufﬁcient study. In particular, each satellite
knows its own position and velocity and does not consider
the constraints of any other satellites when executing its
own control law.
B. Angle-Based Formation Conﬁguration
As shown in Fig. 1, we employ a convex polygon to con-
struct the desired circular formation conﬁguration for this
group of n ≥ 3 satellites. In the convex polygon formation,
satellites spread in a common circle and measure only the
relative LOS vector toward their neighboring satellites. Let
αi denote the angle subtended at satellite i by the other two
neighboring satellites. Then, the interior angle αi deﬁned in
Fig. 2 can be calculated by
cos αi = zT
ij zik (3)
where zij = (p j − pi )/∥p j − pi∥∈ R3 is the LOS bearing
between satellites i and j.
Let α∗
i ∈ (0,π ) be the desired steady-state angles of the
convex polygon. Since α∗
i are the interior angles of the de-
sired convex polygon, it follows that ∑n
i=1 α∗
i = (n − 2)π.
Then, the objective of the angle-based formation control
problem can be converted to the realization of the desired
angle constraints as follows:
lim
t→ +∞
(αi (t ) − α∗
i ) = 0. (4)
For example, in our desired conﬁguration deﬁned by
the convex polygon construction, a group of three satellites
can form a triangular formation in a common circle. Then,
the triangular formation can be completely determined by
α∗
i , i ∈{ 1, 2, 3}. In fact, there is a redundant angle for this
LI ET AL.: SA TELLITE FORMA TION FL YING CONTROL BY USING ONL Y ANGLE MEASUREMENTS 1441
Authorized licensed use limited to: HANGZHOU DIANZI UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 23,2026 at 07:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 